### Context
I'm currently preparing a course on "Ethnographies of Computing Environments" at Ruhr University Bochum. As part of that, I need to introduce students to the general concepts of ethnography. I usually really enjoy that part.  
But I have not been entirely happy with the reading I assigned for that general intro to ethnography because even though I think it is a valid introductory text, I think it approaches "culture" too much through language and the taxonomic ordering of our everyday interactions. In that, the text is strongly influenced by cognitive anthropology / ethnoscience while I would like to introduce students also to a more practice oriented way of doing (or at least understanding) ethnography (-> praxeogrphy / praxiography).

To rephrase the old academic debate: Culture is not just what stories people tell about their worlds or how they categorize and perceive it, but at least as much about what they do and how they do it. And going one step further, ethnography is not even just observing what **people** do but also noting what all the **non-human actors** (from animals to architecture and from fungi to transmission protocols) do and and how they participate in the production of actual social formations.

While I was searching for a good text to counter this language bias and anthropocentrism, I read an excellent [paper](https://www.theorie.soziologie.uni-mainz.de/files/2019/09/2006_HumStud_Putting-Things-Into-Words.pdf) by [Stefan Hirschauer](https://www.grc.uni-mainz.de/prof-stefan-hirschauer/) who argues that ethnography's "referential problem" is to verbally articulate that which is not expressed in words yet - the silent. For the course, I think the whole text is to dense, but I think that reading a few key passages together and maybe staging a debate after that could be a good way to give a richer impression of what ethnography might be.

What follows is an excerpt of some of the key points and some quotes I took out of it but it is by no means a full summary. If you are interested in the arguments laid out by Hirschauer, I would encourage you to read the whole paper!

### Excerpt

**Author**  
Stefan Hirschauer  
**Full title:**  
Putting things into words. Ethnographic description and the silence of the social. 

#### Summary and key points
Hirschauer's [paper](https://www.theorie.soziologie.uni-mainz.de/files/2019/09/2006_HumStud_Putting-Things-Into-Words.pdf) unfolds its arguments around the initial proposition that ethnography should not be understood as a form of naturalistic documentation of human knowledge which could be primarily studied through verbal expressions (spoken or written words that are frequently elicited and recorded in interview situations) but instead as a way to describe the "'silent' dimension of the social".

As part of a general introduction which gives a great overview of the academic debates concerning ethnographic writing and description that constitute the context for Hirschauer's question and argument, the paper dives deeper into "The problem of forgetting: noting and recording" (Hirschauer 2007: 415-419) and offers a subchapter on the question whether "recordings [can] preserve an original" (419-422). I won't go into those sections of the text, however, and focus on the different forms of "silence" instead. 

Hirschauer differentiates the following aspects in the silent dimension of the social:
* The voiceless
  * The incomprehensible: The things we do not understand without contexual translation -> Thick Description (Geertz)
  * The voices suppressed through strong hierarchies -> Voicing of the unheard and suppressed
  * The unmentionable: Things you are morally forbidden or discouraged to say -> Sensitively decide what may remain unspoken or "transferred" in more subtle ways 
* Speechlessness
  * The impressions and sensual experiences we can't put into words that easily (especially under the constraints of their fast unfolding) -> the ethnographic distancing from the situation of their unfolding which is somewhat paradoxically but true "the retreat to writing (in the field)" or in the own "office". Which is a form of socializing the personal experience (427) because experiences "are preformatted through various codes, they occur already structured by all those categories the available languages (i.e., of everyday life, of the field, of the discipline) allow for (semantically and grammatically)" (ibid). 
* The indescribable
  * What can not be easily verbalized because it is to complex or has multiple meanings
  * The complexity of a situation can result from the rich array of "channels" an observer perceives it in contrast to the reduced "channels" a recording device like a voice recorder or video camera can capture a situation.
  * The pace of any given event can render attempts impossible to capture it live in written words and keep the temporal order intact. -> If the temporal structure of micro-situations is important, recording devices might help to preserve it. But instead of *just* collecting an array of short recordings the strength of ethnography lies in the ability to describe  long term processes and the contextual embedding of micro situations (in addition to their recording).
  * Side note: "Pre-configuration" of the observer's perception and attention by the very intention of describing a situation (430).
* The pre-lingual
  * Tacit and embodied knowledge playing out in our routines and habits. Think of touch typing or tying your shoes but also of your gaze or posture while greeting a friend or traversing a group of people etc. (Also see the quote below)
* Things taken for granted
  * The obvious, common knowledge and the banal that does not need to be spelled out because presumably everybody knows already. This is *obviously* :wink: something that differs between "cultures". 
* Muteness
  * The "utterances" of (especially self animated) non-human (or non talking) entities that do not at all adhere to any form of human language or "signification". Here, Hirschauer lists among others e.g. fetuses, animals and machines. 
  * Another question related to muteness that Hirschauer poses is "whose terminology should be used for description, when only one side is speaking?" which directs the text to a short excurse on Science Studies and Actor-Network Theory.

While I generally wholeheartedly agree, that it is important to also consider non-human entities and their utterances, I do wonder if it is actually correct to classify the signals machines emit to communicate with each other as something that is generally different from human language and signification since all the codes and protocols are a. made by humans, b. relatively easy to translate into human language and and c. actually do signify things that adhere to human language. One exception I can think of, might be signals and codes that completely emerged from artificial neural networks or similar. I don't have a definitive answer on that but I like the way, Hirschauer classified machine signals as different from human language and signification since it made me pause and think. This question will probably stay on my mind for a while.

In the last paragraphs, Hirschauer summarizes his arguments and answers two additional questions that he derives from it:
1. How to control the accuracy or adequacy of ethnographic description compared to technical recordings?
2. If ethnographic description is not primarily about documenting something exactly, what other values does it offer?

#### Quotes
Quotes that I found particularly clear and concise (even though the whole text is very well written and clear in its arguments):

On the trust in verbal accounts and the false impression of transparency in language: 
> "In most cases, we trust in the participants’ primary verbalization. In empirical social research, the positive data, the ‘given’ is almost all the time the said: narrations (oral as well as written), pieces of information, conversations, and discourse. In discourse- and conversation analysis, the linguistic forms are at the center of attention (...). Most forms of interviews, however, view language as a transparent medium without qualities, a window through which the informants allow us to get a direct view of their world. Given this rather naive approach, interviews not only skim the participants’ existing verbalizations, they also try to stimulate them by bringing and keeping their ‘informants’ in conversational situations in which they feel accountable for what they say. Interviews are verbalization methods presupposing that people have specific knowledge that can be extracted by means of ‘questioning.’"  
<cite>(Hirschauer 2007: 422f.)</cite>

On the tacit knowledge and the strength of participation:
> "Another kind of resistance to verbalization has to do with the pre-lingual, that is, with all those layers of implicit, embodied knowledge which the participants own without being able to simply verbalize it themselves – tacit knowledge, as it is so poignantly called. It is here that the limitations of interviews prove to be most unfortunate. Of the many areas of local distribution of knowledge, they only survey knowledge ‘in the head,’ but not knowledge in the hands or the situated knowledge stored in the spatial organization of material practices and objects.[^fn1] This kind of knowledge resists language not for moral reasons (like the unmentionable) but because its verbalization would be eminently unpractical: It would hinder the execution of everyday activities. Participants have a command of the grammar of their activities, but they cannot and need not explicate them. We are dealing here with intrinsically non-verbal knowledge, which poses considerable (and in part insurmountable)[^fn1] resistance to verbalization to the sociological observer. Ethnographic attempts to pull pre-lingual knowledge into the realm of language are based mainly on two operations. The first is marked by the concept of ‘participation,’ i.e., practical membership in events. In regard to the pre-lingual, the rationality of participation lies in immersing oneself in everyday practices but then (instead of bothering other people with questions about it) doing something very alien to practice: verbalizing tacit knowledge. Being ‘on site’ in a novice role opens up access to those occasions in which ‘explanations’ are also given to other learners (for example, to children or apprentices). A procedure is explained to them by demonstrating it on an object, accompanied by a few words. Furthermore, the local observer can attempt to acquire certain skills, in order to gain participation competence. Garfinkel’s invitation to ‘become the phenomenon!’ was an instruction to plunge into the deep layers of practical knowledge and go into symbiosis with the object.[^fn1] The sociological participant’s knowledge acquired in this way, however, would become immediately habitual if it were not simultaneously documented in writing."  
<cite>(Hirschauer 2007: 431f.)</cite>

The advantage of initial strangeness in ethnographic research and the need of methodological alienation:
> "The most powerful resource for dealing with things taken for granted and with the obvious ethnographically, is the unfamiliarity of the observer. (...) In principle, verbalizations can be released more freely when at a distance from the culturally obvious. Accordingly, ethnographic textbooks recommend immediately explicating first impressions and exploiting them to a maximum, before the basic features of the field become normalized in one’s perception, and thus disappear again into one’s own pre-lingual tacit knowledge. Ethnographers’ initial position as strangers in the field, which enables certain insights, can be methodically renewed during their stay and further used as a resource by varying the normal distance to the object, thus actively ‘alienating it’ (Amann & Hirschauer, 1997). (...) To use an optical metaphor, descriptions – just like transcripts – should offer microscopic ‘close-ups.’ If descriptions’ rendering of details were merely ‘realistic’ they would not exceed the participants’ knowledge. Only a ‘hyperrealistic’ change in scale enables us to see the all too familiar in a new light. Thus, description and transcription are not copies that can be looked at again and again (substituting the original), but rather different lenses one needs to ‘look through’ in order to gain new ways of seeing.[^fn1]"  
<cite>(Hirschauer 2007: 433)</cite>

### References
<sub>
**Hirschauer, Stefan**  
**2007**  Putting things into words. Ethnographic description and the silence of the social. *Human Studies* 29(6): 413-41.  
[Digitally available [here](https://www.theorie.soziologie.uni-mainz.de/files/2019/09/2006_HumStud_Putting-Things-Into-Words.pdf), Last accessed: 2021.01.09]
<sub>

[^fn1]: I removed a footnote here; R.H.
